Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 81:1–1, 2018 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
Meaningful Information and the Right to Explanation
[Extended Abstract] ∗
Andrew D. Selbst andrew@datasociety.net
Data & Society Research Institute; Yale Information Society Project.
Julia Powles julia.powles@nyu.edu
Cornell Tech; New York University; University of Cambridge.
Editors: Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson
Abstract
This article addresses an active debate in
policy, industry, academia, and the me-
dia about whether and to what extent Eu-
rope’s new General Data Protection Regu-
lation (GDPR) grants individuals a “right
to explanation” of automated decisions.
There is no single, neat statutory pro-
vision labelled the “right to explanation”
in the GDPR. But nor is such a right illu-
sory. Responding to two prominent papers
that, in turn, conjure and critique the right
to explanation in the context of automated
decision-making, we advocate a return to
the text of the GDPR. Articles 13–15 of
the GDPR provide individuals with rights
to “meaningful information about the logic
involved” in automated decisions. This is a
right to explanation, whether one uses the
phrase or not.
The first paper we address, Goodman
and Flaxman (2017), is an explainer for
a technical audience. It asserts that the
GDPR creates a “right to explanation,”
but does not flesh out the argument. In
response, Wachter et al. (2017) published
an extensive critique, arguing against the
existence of such a right. Our article is par-
tially concerned with responding to the ar-
guments of Wachter et al.. Our corrective
involves two major strands. First, we show
that Wachter et al. do not fairly inter-
pret the concept of “explanation,” instead
choosing to attack only a narrowed version
of it, amounting to an ex post explanation
of a specific decision. At the same time, the
paper claims that the GDPR does support
a “right to be informed,” which is defined
as an ex ante explanation of system func-
∗ Extended abstract of Selbst and Powles (2017)
tionality—in other words, still an explana-
tion. Second, the argument relies on an an-
alytical framework that cleaves ex ante and
ex post decisions and system functional-
ity and specific decisions. We demonstrate
that this framework is built on incorrect
legal and technical assumptions.
In addition to responding to the existing
scholarly contributions, our article articu-
lates a positive conception of the right to
explanation, located in the text and pur-
pose of the GDPR. We take a position that
the right should be interpreted function-
ally, flexibly, and should, at a minimum,
enable a data subject to exercise his or her
rights under the GDPR and human rights
law.
Keywords: Automated decisions, data
processing, data protection law, explana-
tion, interpretability, machine learning
References
Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. European
Union Regulations on Algorithmic Decision-
Making and a “Right to Explanation”. AI
Magazine, 38(3):50–57, 2017.
Andrew D. Selbst and Julia Powles. Meaning-
ful Information and the Right to Explanation.
International Data Privacy Law, 7(4):233–242,
2017.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Luciano
Floridi. Why a Right to Explanation of Auto-
mated Decision-Making Does Not Exist in the
General Data Protection Regulation. Interna-
tional Data Privacy Law, 7(2):76–99, 2017.
c© 2018 A.D. Selbst & J. Powles.
