
We explore ways in which discrimination
may arise in the targeting of job-related
advertising, noting the potential for multi-
ple parties to contribute to its occurrence.
We then examine the statutes and case law
interpreting the prohibition on advertise-
ments that indicate a preference based on
protected class, and consider its applica-
tion to online advertising. We focus on its
interaction with Section 230 of the Com-
munications Decency Act, which provides
interactive computer services with immu-
nity for providing access to information
created by a third party. We argue that
such services can lose that immunity if they
target ads toward or away from protected
classes without explicit instructions from
advertisers to do so.
Keywords: Discrimination, online adver-
tising, law.
1 INTRODUCTION
Recent studies demonstrate that computer
systems can discriminate, including by gen-
der (Datta et al., 2015; Caliskan et al., 2017; Kay
et al., 2015; Lambrecht and Tucker, 2017; Boluk-
basi et al., 2016), sexual orientation (Guha et al.,
2010), and race (Sweeney, 2013; Angwin et al.,
2016; Angwin and Parris, 2016). Although much
scholarship exists on the legal consequences of
discrimination, little work has explored the le-
gal status of these concrete cases (Barocas and
Selbst (2016) is the only one we are aware of).
The consideration of such concrete cases, instead
of abstract hypotheticals, forces us to confront
the difficulties of proving a case based upon the
limited evidence practically available to investi-
gators. Such careful consideration can show what
empirical evidence could aid the crafting of a
case, which suggests new studies, and how laws
might not be enforceable in practice. Further-
more, they have the potential to show that li-
ability can lie with an advertising platform, not
just in theory, but in practice. Such a finding can
promote positive change and guide regulators to
the interesting questions to ask.
An example of a real world difficulty is that
while the existence of discrimination might be
clear, the cause might not be. Computers may
use factors associated with, but distinct from,
protected attributes. This not only complicates
the detection of discrimination, but also provides
those intending to discriminate with a gloss of
statistical rationality and leads fair-minded in-
dividuals to unwittingly discriminate via models
that redundantly encode gender, race, or other
protected attributes.
This paper provides a legal analysis of a
real case, which found that simulated users se-
lecting a gender in Google’s Ad Settings pro-
duces employment-related advertisements differ-
ing rates along gender lines despite identical
web browsing patterns (Section 3) (Datta et al.,
2015). We then explore the operation of Google’s
advertising network to understand the various
c© 2018 A. Datta, A. Datta, J. Makagon, D.K. Mulligan & M.C. Tschantz.
Discrimination in Online Advertising
decision points that could contribute to the
gender-skewed placement of such ads (Section 4).
In doing so, we find that advertisers can use
Google’s advertising platform to target and serve
employment ads based on gender. While we
explore possible reasons that could have con-
tributed to the discriminatory placement of ads,
these explorations are not exhaustive. Uncover-
ing the cause behind the discriminatory place-
ment of ads requires further visibility into the
advertising ecosystem or assumptions over how
the ecosystem operates, and is beyond the scope
of this paper.
We then explore legal questions and policy
concerns raised by these results. Focusing on
employment-related ads, we consider potential li-
ability for advertisers and ad networks under Ti-
tle VII, which makes it unlawful for employers
and employment agencies “to print or publish or
cause to be printed or published any . . . ad-
vertisement relating to employment. . . indicating
any preference, limitation, specification, or dis-
crimination, based on . . . sex”.1
Due to the limited covered of Title VII we con-
clude that a generic advertising platform, like
Google’s, is unlikely to incur liability under Ti-
tle VII’s prohibitions regardless of any contribu-
tions they make to the illegality of an advertise-
ment. Advertisements that run afoul of the Fair
Housing Act’s (FHA’s) prohibition on indicating
a preference however could create liability as un-
like Title VII the FHA provision is of general
applicability. In a case under the FHA, a court
would need to consider how the advertising prohi-
bition interacts with Section 230 of the Commu-
nications Decency Act (CDA),2 which provides
interactive computer services with immunity for
providing access to information created or devel-
oped by a third party. Thus, we focus on the
interaction between the prohibition on discrimi-
natory advertising in the FHA and Section 230.
We argue that despite the broad immunity gener-
ally afforded by Section 230, interactive computer
services can lose that immunity if they target ads
toward or away from protected classes. The loss
of immunity is based on the act of targeting itself
rather than any content that is contained within
the four corners of the advertisement. We fo-
1. §704(b) of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
codified at 4