
This paper studies a recommendation algo-
rithm whose outcomes are not influenced
by specified information. It is useful in
contexts potentially unfair decision should
be avoided, such as job-applicant recom-
mendations that are not influenced by so-
cially sensitive information. An algorithm
that could exclude the influence of sensi-
tive information would thus be useful for
job-matching with fairness. We call the
condition between a recommendation out-
come and a sensitive feature Recommenda-
tion Independence, which is formally de-
fined as statistical independence between
the outcome and the feature. Our previous
independence-enhanced algorithms simply
matched the means of predictions between
sub-datasets consisting of the same sensi-
tive value. However, this approach could
not remove the sensitive information rep-
resented by the second or higher moments
of distributions. In this paper, we develop
new methods that can deal with the second
moment, i.e., variance, of recommendation
outcomes without increasing the compu-
tational complexity. These methods can
more strictly remove the sensitive infor-
mation, and experimental results demon-
strate that our new algorithms can more
effectively eliminate the factors that un-
dermine fairness. Additionally, we explore
potential applications for independence-
enhanced recommendation, and discuss its
relation to other concepts, such as recom-
mendation diversity.
∗ Our experimental codes are available at http://www.
kamishima.net/iers/
Keywords: Recommender System, Fair-
ness, Independence
1 INTRODUCTION
A recommender system searches for items or in-
formation predicted to be useful to users, and
its influence on users’ decision-making has been
growing. For example, online-retail-store cus-
tomers check recommendation lists, and are more
likely to decide to buy highly-rated items. Rec-
ommender systems have thus become an indis-
pensable tool in support of decision-making.
Such decision-making support tools must be
fair and unbiased, because users can make poor
decisions if recommendations are influenced by
specific information that does not match their
needs. Hence, a recommendation algorithm that
can exclude the influence of such information
from its outcome would be very valuable. There
are several representative scenarios in which the
exclusion of specific information would be nec-
essary. First, there are contexts in which rec-
ommendation services must be managed in ad-
herence to laws and regulations. Sweeney pre-
sented an example of dubious advertisement
placement that appeared to exhibit racial dis-
crimination (Sweeney, 2013). In this case, the
advertisers needed to generate personalized ad-
vertisements that were independent of racial in-
formation. Another concern is the fair treatment
of information providers. An example in this con-
text is the Federal Trade Commissions investiga-
tion of Google to determine whether the search
engine ranks its own services higher than those
of competitors (Forden, 2012). Algorithms that
c© 2018 T. Kamishima, S. Akaho, H. Asoh & J. Sakuma.
Recommendation Independence
can explicitly exclude information, whether or
not content providers are competitors, would be
helpful for alleviating competitors’ doubts that
their services are being unfairly underrated. Fi-
nally, a user sometimes needs to exclude the influ-
ence of unwanted information. Popularity bias,
which is the tendency for popular items to be
recommended more frequently (Celma and Cano,
2008), is a well-known drawback of recommenda-
tion algorithms. If information on the popularity
of items could be excluded, users could acquire
information free from unwanted popularity bias.
To fulfill the need for techniques to exclude the
influence of specific information, several meth-
ods for fairness-aware data mining have been
developed (for review, see Hajian et al., 2016).
In these approaches, a classifier is designed
to predict labels so that they are independent
from specified sensitive information. By in-
troducing this idea, we proposed the concept
of recommendation independence. This is for-
mally defined as unconditional statistical inde-
pendence between a recommendation outcome
and specified information. We call a recom-
mendation that maintains the recommendation
independence independence-enhanced recommen-
dation. We developed two types of approaches
to these recommendations. The first is a regu-
larization approach, which adopts an objective
function with a constraint term for imposing
independence (Kamishima et al., 2012a, 2013;
Kamishima and Akaho, 2017). The second is a
model-based approach, which adopts a generative
model in which an outcome and a sensitive fea-
ture are independent (Kamishima et al., 2016).
In this paper, we propose new methods
for making independence-enhanced recommenda-
tions. Our previous model (Kamishima et al.,
2013) took a regularization approach and com-
bined probabilistic matrix factorization and a
constraint term. However, because the con-
straint term was heuristically designed so that it
matched means by shifting predicted ratings, it
could not remove the sensitive information repre-
sented by the second or higher moments of distri-
butions. Further, the approach could not control
the range of predicted ratings, and thus would
skew the rating distribution. For example, if all
predicted ratings were shifted toward +1, the
lowest ratings would not appear in the predic-
tions. To remove these drawbacks without sacri-
ficing computational efficiency, we developed two
new types of constraint terms exploiting statis-
tical measures: Bhattacharyya distance and mu-
tual information.
We performed more extensive experiments
than in our previous studies in order to achieve
more reliable verification. Here, we examine algo-
rithms on three datasets and six types of sensitive
features to confirm the effects of independence-
enhancement. To verify the improvements that
derive from considering the second moments, we
quantitatively compared the quality of rating dis-
tributions using an independence measure.
Moreover, we explore scenarios in which
independence-enhanced recommendation would
be useful, and clarify the relation between recom-
mendation independence and other recommenda-
tion research topics. We provide more examples
of three types of scenarios in which enhancement
of recommendation independence would be use-
ful. As in the discussion in the RecSys 2011
panel (Resnick et al., 2011), rich recommenda-
tion diversity has been considered beneficial for
making recommendations fair. We discuss the
differences in the definitions of recommendation
diversity and independence. We also note the
relation to transparency and privacy in a recom-
mendation context.
Our contributions are as follows.
• We develop new independence-enhanced rec-
ommendation models that can deal with the
second moment of distributions without sac-
rificing computational efficiency.
• Our more extensive experiments reveal the
effectiveness of enhancing recommendation
independence and of considering the second
moments.
• We explore applications in which recommen-
dation independence would be useful, and
reveal the relation of independence to the
other concepts in recommendation research.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2,
we present the concept of recommendation in-
dependence, and discuss how the concept would
be useful for solving real-world problems. Meth-
ods for independence-enhanced recommendation
are proposed in section 3, and the experimen-
tal results are presented in section 4. Section 5
contains a discussion about recommendation in-
dependence and related recommendation issues,
and section 6 concludes our paper.
dislike like
(a) standard
dislike like
(b) independence-enhanced
Figure 1: Distributions of the predicted ratings
for each sensitive value
