
The presence of gender stereotypes in many
aspects of society is a well-known phe-
nomenon. In this paper, we focus on
studying such stereotypes and bias in Hindi
movie industry (Bollywood) and propose an
algorithm to remove these stereotypes from
text. We analyze movie plots and posters
for all movies released since 1970. The
gender bias is detected by semantic model-
ing of plots at sentence and intra-sentence
level. Different features like occupation,
introductions, associated actions and de-
scriptions are captured to show the perva-
siveness of gender bias and stereotype in
movies. Using the derived semantic graph,
we compute centrality of each character
and observe similar bias there. We also
show that such bias is not applicable for
movie posters where females get equal im-
portance even though their character has
little or no impact on the movie plot. The
silver lining is that our system was able to
identify 30 movies over last 3 years where
such stereotypes were broken. The next
step, is to generate debiased stories. The
proposed debiasing algorithm extracts gen-
der biased graphs from unstructured piece
of text in stories from movies and de-bias
these graphs to generate plausible unbiased
stories.
1 INTRODUCTION
Movies are a reflection of the society. They mir-
ror (with creative liberties) the problems, issues,
thinking & perception of the contemporary soci-
ety. Therefore, we believe movies could act as
the proxy to understand how prevalent gender
bias and stereotypes are in any society. In this
paper, we leverage NLP and image understand-
ing techniques to quantitatively study this bias.
To further motivate the problem we pick a small
section from the plot of a blockbuster movie.
”Rohit is an aspiring singer who works as a
salesman in a car showroom, run by Malik (Dalip
Tahil). One day he meets Sonia Saxena (Amee-
sha Patel), daughter of Mr. Saxena (Anupam
Kher), when he goes to deliver a car to her home
as her birthday present.”
This piece of text is taken from the plot of Bol-
lywood movie Kaho Na Pyaar Hai. This simple
two line plot showcases the issue in following fash-
ion:
1. Male (Rohit) is portrayed with a profession
& an aspiration
2. Male (Malik) is a business owner
In contrast, the female role is introduced with
no profession or aspiration. The introduction,
itself, is dependent upon another male character
”daughter of”!
One goal of our work is to analyze and quantify
gender-based stereotypes by studying the demar-
c© 2018 N. Madaan, S. Mehta, T.S. Agrawaal, V. Malhotra, A. Aggarwal, Y. Gupta & M. Saxena.
Analyze, Detect and Remove Gender Stereotyping from Bollywood Movies
cation of roles designated to males and females.
We measure this by performing an intra-sentence
and inter-sentence level analysis of movie plots
combined with the cast information. Captur-
ing information from sentences helps us perform
a holistic study of the corpus. Also, it helps
us in capturing the characteristics exhibited by
male and female class. We have extracted movies
pages of all the Hindi movies released from 1970-
present from Wikipedia. We also employ deep
image analytics to capture such bias in movie
posters and previews.
1.1. Analysis Tasks
We focus on following tasks to study gender bias
in Bollywood.
I) Occupations and Gender Stereotypes-
How are males portrayed in their jobs vs females?
How are these levels different? How does it cor-
relate to gender bias and stereotype?
II) Appearance and Description - How are
males and females described on the basis of their
appearance? How do the descriptions differ in
both of them? How does that indicate gender
stereotyping?
III) Centrality of Male and Female Char-
acters - What is the role of males and females
in movie plots? How does the amount of male
being central or female being central differ? How
does it present a male or female bias?
IV) Mentions(Image vs Plot) - How many
males and females are the faces of the promo-
tional posters? How does this correlate to them
being mentioned in the plot? What results are
conveyed on the combined analysis?
V) Dialogues - How do the number of dia-
logues differ between a male cast and a female
cast in official movie script?
VI) Singers - Does the same bias occur in
movie songs? How does the distribution of
singers with gender vary over a period of time
for different movies?
VII) Female-centric Movies- Are the movie
stories and portrayal of females evolving? Have
we seen female-centric movies in the recent past?
VIII) Screen Time - Which gender, if any,
has a greater screen time in movie trailers?
IX) Emotions of Males and Females -
Which emotions are most commonly displayed by
males and females in a movie trailer? Does this
correspond with the gender stereotypes which ex-
ist in society?
